# MSC_ThesisProject
Climate change has thrown many challenges before mankind today. They range from rising sea levels to unpredictable weather events causing huge human and material losses. As such, creating better and more accurate weather models is more important than ever before. However current weather models often fail to accurately predict weather events, mostly due to gaps in these models. One such gap is the understanding and representation of stratocumulus clouds. Stratocumulus clouds are shallow clouds that occur at about 2000m height and play an important role in maintaining the Earth’s radiation and heat balance. Yet they have not been properly understood and represented in weather models. The first attempt at classifying these clouds was done only in 2018. Scientists classified stratocumulus clouds into four categories: ‘Sugar’, ’Fish’, ’Flower’ and ‘Gravel’.
However, this classification was done manually and as such was limited to a few hundred satellite images. This project aims to do this on a global scale using deep learning algorithms involving thousands of such satellite images. In the past few years, deep learning algorithms like Convolutional Neural Networks have shown tremendous promise in the field of image recognition, reaching human-level accuracy in many cases.
This project has three major aims. The first aim is to create a deep neural network that can classify satellite images of stratocumulus clouds into the four aforementioned categories. Latest deep learning models such as UNet, ResNet and Xception has been used for this purpose. The second aim is to see if there is a relationship between any of these cloud categories and weather events like cyclones. Visualisation technologies such as Altair and Matplotlib has been used for this part. The third aim is to study the effect of rising global temperatures caused by climate change and the formation and meso-scale organisation of these stratocumulus clouds. The aforementioned visualisation technologies have been used for visual analysis along with time-series models such as ARIMA, which has been used for forecasting formation of clouds in the near future.
